In this lecture, you'll learn what the different routing protocol types are. Our routing protocols can be split
into two main types, thats our IGPs, which are our Interior Gateway Protocols and EGP, which is an
Exterior Gateway Protocol. Interior Gateway Protocols (IGP) are used for routing within an organization. And Exterior
Gateway Protocol (EGP) is used for routing between organizations over the Internet.
There are used to be a legacy
EGPs, but the only EGP that is in use today is BGP, the Border Gateway Protocol.
There are several different IGPs though. Our different IGPs can be split into two main types, either
Distance Vector routing protocols or Link State routing protocols. We'll explain what the different ones
are and which group they fall into
coming up in a couple of slides. So in Distance Vector protocols,
each router sends its directly connected neighbours a list of all its known networks, along with its own
distance to each of those networks.
Distance Vector routing protocols do not advertise the entire network topology. A router only knows
its directly connected neighbours and the list of networks
those neighbours have advertised. It doesn't have detailed topology information beyond those directly
connected neighbours.So because of this, Distance Vector routing protocols are often called as routing by
rumuor.
We can compare this with our Link State routing protocols. In Link State routing protocols, each router
describes itself and its interfaces to its directly connected neighbors.
That information is then passed unchanged from one router to another.
Every router thus learns the full picture of a network, including every router,
its interfaces, and what they connect to.
Okay,
I know it's a subtle difference and it can be a bit confusing and I've seen lots of people that actually
are confused with this on the Internet and spreading misinformation.
So let's break it down what the difference is. With our Distance Vector and our Link State routing protocols,
both of them only form an adjacency with directly connected neighbors.
So if you think back to our lab topology before where we had R1, R2, and R3 in a row,
R1 and R2 are going to talk to each other, and R2 and R3 are going to talk to each other
and share information with each other.
But, R1 does not talk to R3 directly with the routing protocol. Okay, thats for both Distance
Vector and for Link State routing protocols as well.
So both of them, the routers only share information with their directly connected neighbors.
The difference is that with Distance Vector routing protocols, those updates are from the point of view
of the neighbor.
The neighbor says, "I know about these networks and this is what my distance is to each of those." With
Link State routing protocols, the routers still talk to their neighbors
that they say, "Hey, these are all of the routers and their links that are in the network." And the information
passes along unchanged.
It does not get updated from the point of view of that router like it does with Distance Vector routing
protocols.
So with Link State routing protocols, the routers have a full picture of the topology and they have a reputation
of being able to make better routing decisions because of this. But Link State routing protocols
do put a bit more load on the router because it's got more information there.
Okay, so let's take a look at what the different routing protocols they are and what type they fit into.
So our IGPs are: RIP, the Routing Information Protocol; EIGRP the Enhanced Interior Gateway Protocol;
OSPF, which is Open Shortest Path First; and ISIS, which is Intermediate System to Intermediate System.
RIP and EIGRP are Distance Vector routing protocols, and OSPF and ISIS are Link State routing protocols,
and that's all the IGPs that there are in use today. EIGRP is a Cisco proprietary Distance Vector routing
protocol, and it's got some really good advantages that we'll speak about later. And because it's proprietary,
Cisco would like you to use it because then it walks you into using purely Cisco devices.
Now like I said, it is a really good routing protocol, but Distance Vector routing protocols have got a
bit of an inferior reputation as compared to Link State routing protocols for the reasons that I just
described.
So Cisco don't want you to think of EIGRP as an inferior routing protocol, so they call it an advanced
Distance Vector routing protocol.
However, to be honest, it's a distance vector routing protocol. It works the same way as RIP does. Cisco
call it advanced because it's got more advanced metrics than RIP is.
So it is a much better routing protocol than RIP.
Again, as we get more into detail into the different routing protocols, I'll explain why that is
later on.
Okay, so that's our different IGPs,
and as I said earlier, our one and only EGP is used today is BGP, the Border Gateway Protocol. In the
next several sections,
I'll be covering the IGPs in depth,
we'll get to BGP in a later section. With our IGPs, they all do the same job which is to advertise routes
within an organization and determine the best path or paths to the different networks.
So an organization will typically pick one
of the IGPs. They all do the same job,
so there isn't really any need to use more than one of them. Actually using more than one of them is
a bad idea. But does sometimes happen though, usually because of a merger or maybe just historical reasons.
If that does happen, then information can be redistributed between the different routing protocols.
But because they work in different ways internally, this can get a bit messy.
So it's generally best to avoid that if possible.
Okay so that was our different routing protocol types.
Let's have a quick look at this in the lab in the next lecture.